Chapter 7: the spec at 8032ff2
7. State and data representation
7.1 Continuous state: structured immutable, flat backing
Each continuous component declares its state by value ( x_init, §8.2). The declaration is a Named ­
Tuple whose leaves are drawn from a deliberately closed vocabulary, plain real scalars and 
SArrays (static vectors and matrices) of a common eltype T, and nothing else. Ints, enums and 
Bools belong in modes. Domain wrapper types (RQuat, Ranged) are not state leaves. An attitude state 
is an SVector{4,T}, cast where rotation semantics are wanted, as described below. The declaration 
is flat. Each field is one leaf, never a NamedTuple of leaves. The condition algebra and the readers 
address a field as one leaf (§14.3, §14.4), and structure comes from the component tree, not from the 
value (D­094). The framework does three things with the declaration.
• It computes a flat layout at build time, with compile­time offsets over one contiguous Vector{T} 
buffer it owns.
• It reconstructs the typed immutable state value for a component at each evaluation and passes 
it to every function receiving state views, under the argument rule of §5.2. The reconstruction is 
field loads at known offsets, register­level, at zero cost.
• It receives immutable results back. Derivative functions return an Ẋ­typed value, which is scatter­
stored into the flat x buffer. Event handlers and projection return a new Ẋ, which is written back, 
with projection at the two positions in the execution order of §5.3.
What Ẋ is. With the leaf vocabulary closed, the answer takes one line. Ẋ has exactly Ẋ's shape at the 
activation scalar. A scalar leaf's derivative is a T, and an SArray leaf's is the same SArray at T. This is 
the vocabulary rule paying rent. An invariant­carrying leaf like a unit quaternion has a derivative 
off its own type, and Ẋ would need a separate derivation. Here the attitude leaf is an SVector{4,T} 
and so is its rate. The conformance predicate is structural. Each field of x_deriv's return scatters into 
its field's block at T (§9.5 states the check). That makes derivative completeness a property of the 
layout rather than of author discipline. There is deliberately no derivative_type hook (D­190).
The buffer is authoritative, and typed values are ephemeral reconstructions.  Nobody 
outside the framework ever holds a mutable reference to state. "Ephemeral" is literal. An isbits 
view materializes in the caller's frame for exactly the duration of the call, and has no existence 
between calls. Where it materializes, in registers or on the spilled stack, is the compiler's business. 
Re­materializing is the same loads, and it is value­identical because the value is immutable and the 
buffer is unchanged within a sweep.
Whether repeated reads within a sweep re­materialize or reuse the loads is codegen freedom, in the 
literal sense that the freedom is the code generator's. The executor (the compiled form of the stage 
execution order) is spelled rebuild­per­call, and hoisting a repeated read is the code generator's CSE. 
The legality condition of that CSE is exactly the buffer­unchanged­within­a­sweep rule (§9.7).
The complementary rule is one home per datum (§5.2). The buffer holds x, the stores hold s and 
m, and the table holds produced signals. No store ever mirrors another. In particular there are no 
1
=====PAGE=====
state cells in the table beyond the declared ports a component returns from y_state (§5.3), which 
are interface, not transport.
The vocabulary is closed because views must materialize without running anyone's invari­
ants. Scalars and SArrays have invariant ­free constructors. SVector's stores its tuple, NamedTuple 
construction runs no user code, and nothing normalizes or clamps. Building a view through ordinary 
public construction is therefore bit­faithful automatically. reconstruct(flatten(x)) == x holds iden­
tically, with no constructor bypass, no reinterpret, and no reliance on a custom struct's memory 
layout mirroring the buffer's. Invariant ­carrying leaves are closed ( D­094). Domain semantics are 
instead an explicit, invariant­free cast at the point of use , the conversion today's f_ode! code 
performs on its raw views. Invariants live where the design already put them, in x_projection at 
boundaries and in writers. Handlers build their returned values through ordinary constructors, and 
the condition apply converts authored values through ordinary convert methods (§14.3). Construc­
tors run on the write paths, never on views.
Against today's flat­Vector + ComponentArrays­views pattern, this buys five things.
• There are no aliased mutable views, where who writes what is a matter of convention.
• Derivative completeness is structural. The returned Ẋ has every field by construction, so a 
forgotten x entry is impossible rather than silently stale.
• State fields arrive as the declared scalars and SArrays, immutable. The domain wrapper, where 
wanted, is one explicit invariant ­free cast ( RQuat(x.q, normalization = false)). That is the 
conversion the mutable­views pattern performed implicitly, now visible and chosen.
• The flat vector still exists. Integrator compatibility (OrdinaryDiffEq or custom), trim solvers, HDF5 
logging and linearization all get their arrays.
• The hand ­written per ­aircraft state­space mapping layer ( get_x_ss/assign_x_ss!/get_u_ss/…) is 
deleted, replaced by the framework's canonical layout.
7.2 Numeric genericity (eltype)
The state buffer, the pack/unpack machinery, and the entire continuous evaluation path  are 
generic over T =: Real. This one design property serves four consumers.
1. Exact Jacobians for linearization, with ForwardDiff duals through the whole model, replacing 
finite differences.
2. Derivatives for trim solvers.
3. The feedthrough tracer (the set­propagation instrument classifying a rejected cycle, §5.6).
4. A trivially checkable CI invariant. One evaluation sweep with T = Dual fails loudly (MethodError/
InexactError at the offending line) on any Float64­pinning.
For consumer 1, the discrete side's exemption is not a limitation but the exact answer. A frozen 
discrete cell is a constant with zero partials, which is what "linearize the continuous dynamics with 
the discrete state held" means. frozen_discrete_walkthrough.md works the chain through in detail.
The declaration layer keeps this scoping legible without putting it in the author's way. Every decla­
ration is written at nominal Float64, and one walk retypes it per activation (§8.2). On the continuous 
tier a Float64 leaf follows the activation scalar, in a contract and in the x_init­derived state type 
alike, and a contract leaf wrapped as Pinned{P} is deliberately pinned. Participation is therefore 
authored per leaf, by the absence or presence of the marker. The discrete side stays plain and pins 
2
=====PAGE=====
wholesale. Nothing anywhere comes from inference through user code. Safety of the substitution 
rests on the embedding guarantee stated in §9.5.
Scoping, meaning what actually needs genericity, covers roughly half the type inventory and has 
three tiers (D­011).
• Walked, the payload and value types constructed during evaluation (about 25 structs). 
These are the quaternion/attitude family, Wrench, FrameTransform, MassProperties, KinData, 
AirData, geodesy value types, TerrainData and continuous output structs. Quaternion becomes 
Quaternion{N,T} =: AbstractVector{T}. By invariance, Float64 instances still match every existing 
AbstractVector{Float64} method, so existing behavior is untouched. The parametrization is me ­
chanical. Constructors infer T, so call sites don't change, and @kwdef defaults pin the no­argument 
case to Float64.
• Pinned, the parameters and definitions. They stay Float64, since promotion handles mixing, and 
need no migration.
• Exempt, the discrete side (compensators, avionics). Linearization and trim differentiate contin ­
uous dynamics only.
For lookups, table data is a pinned parameter and the query coordinate is walked traffic.  
Interpolations.jl evaluates generically over the coordinate. itp(x=:Dual) works through the BSpline/
scale/extrapolate compositions in use. Two caveats apply. Linear() interpolants have kinked deriv­
atives at knots. That is no regression against finite differences, but upgrade to Cubic where Jacobian 
quality near a lookup matters. A manual chain rule via Interpolations.gradient is the escape hatch 
for anything exotic, and the pattern for wrapping non­Julia black boxes.
Rule. Three rules are author­facing. First, no =:Float64 argument annotations in math. Use =:Real or 
nothing, which the codebase already mostly does. Second, no Float64­pinned intermediates. Write 
zero(SVector{3,T}). Third, no ::SomeType{Float64} return­type annotations  on the continuous 
path, because they force converts and hence InexactError. The * method in attitude.jl is the live 
example pattern.
7.3 Discrete state, modes, and workspace
Two homes sit outside the continuous buffer, and the rules they obey are opposites. Discrete state 
and modes are state in the full sense. They are isbits values that the framework owns and that a 
checkpoint copies wholesale. A workspace is mutable scratch, deliberately not state at all, governed 
by contract rather than by checks.
Stores: discrete state and modes
Rule. Discrete state, a discrete leaf's s, and the modes m live in typed stores, apart from the buffer 
that holds x (§7.1). The framework overwrites an s or m store when an update or a handler returns 
a new value.
An s or m store keeps the same immutable ­value discipline as the table's cells, in a separate home. 
The vocabulary of §4.1 never counts a store as a cell. The s and m stores never touch the integrator 
buffer, and no arithmetic is ever done on them.
Rule. Every field of an s or m store value is isbits or a Symbol. Isbits is an immutable value that 
holds no references, transitively. Enums, integers, Bools, SArrays and nested isbits structs all qualify. 
3
=====PAGE=====
A Symbol is admitted as the idiomatic label. It is interned, immutable and never freed, so it copies 
as a pointer to permanent data and serializes as its name. The table admits it on the same grounds, 
as an opaque leaf (§4.3). A String, an array, or a struct holding either does not qualify, and neither 
does a struct nesting a Symbol. The structure step checks every s_init and m_init field and reports a 
violation as IllegalStoreField (§9.1, Appendix C, D­231).
Why. State is what changes between ticks. Bulk data and labels do not, and their home is the 
component instance. The frozen­reference latitude signals enjoy (§4.1) exists for field handles (§4.4), 
and no store needs it. Isbits is what makes the rest of this section literal. Copying an s or m store 
copies bits, so checkpoint and replay of the entire discrete side is "copy the store values", and a 
stored value has one fixed layout per component.
Workspace
A workspace serves heavy algorithms, such as an n≈20 Kalman filter.
Rule. A workspace is component­declared mutable scratch, instantiated by the framework. It 
arrives as the ws field of the bundle (the NamedTuple of zero ­copy views a component function 
receives) in every bundle ­receiving function of the declaring component ( §5.2). x_projection is 
positional and receives none.
Rule. A workspace is excluded from state semantics . It is not snapshotted, not replayed and 
never a condition target (§14.1). It must carry no information between calls.
The framework never inspects or mutates a workspace . The workspace is an opaque, opt ­in 
escape hatch from value semantics, used at the author's own risk, and its rules are contract, not 
checks. At call entry, contents are unspecified beyond the structure the allocator itself established. A 
plan or factorization configured at allocation is valid from then on. Scratch is garbage until written 
this call, and nothing a previous call left behind may be relied upon. No poisoning of scratch is 
attempted (D­183).
Declared by allocation. The well­known method is the allocator.
ws_init(c=:KF, =:Type{T}) where {T} =
    (P = Matrix{T}(undef, c.n, c.n), xC = Vector{T}(undef, c.n))
Rule. ws_init(=:C, =:Type{T}) takes the activation scalar on both tiers, and it is the one declaration 
that does. A discrete allocator receives Float64 at every activation, because the discrete tier never 
runs at another scalar (§9.4). x_init, s_init, m_init and the contracts take the component alone on 
every tier.
Why. State and cells re­scalar through the walk (§7.2), so those declarations never need T. Scratch 
is allocated, not retyped. A factorization, a plan or a buffer sized by the scalar has no rebuild the 
framework could perform, so the eltypes can come from nowhere but the allocator's own argument 
(D­077, D­263).
The allocator is called once per activation (the build's typed products at a given scalar type) and 
once per scratch ­store set ( §14.8). Sizes come from the instance, and eltypes from the activation. 
Nothing downstream derives from a workspace's type, and mistyped scratch detonates loudly at the 
Dual probe.
4
=====PAGE=====
The undef spelling is the recommended idiom and the sole visible marker that contents are mean ­
ingless. It puts that fact in the declaration, which is the by­allocation convention this store actually 
lives in. Declaration is by allocation, never by initial value (D­077). The init_ prefix means establish, 
as the device contract's init! does ( §11.6), and carries no claim that the allocated contents are a 
value (D­220).
Available on both tiers.  Nothing in the workspace contract is tier ­specific, and a continuous 
workspace simply joins the T­generic surface. Under a Dual activation the allocator is called at Dual, 
and the in­place math runs through Julia's generic fallbacks. No BLAS is involved. Activations probe 
and linearize, they don't run marathons.
The continuous side runs many calls per boundary, for RK stages, localization trial evaluations and 
event re­sweeps. That multiplicity makes the no­information­between­calls contract more essential 
there, not less.
The blessed idiom for zero ­allocation ticks with immutable s. Do the in ­place math (mul!, 
cholesky!, BLAS) on the workspace. At the end, snapshot into an isbits container and return it, as 
in s = KFState(SVector{20}(ws.xC), SMatrix{20,20}(ws.P)).
The blessed idiom for a PRNG in a discrete leaf. A generator object such as Ẋoshiro is mutable, 
so it is scratch and lives in the workspace, allocated once. The values that determine its next draw 
are immutable, so they are state and live in s, which is what makes replay deterministic (§2.2). The 
tick loads them into the generator at entry and snapshots them back at exit, in the same shape as 
the Kalman idiom above.
s_init(=:Noise)         = (rng = (0x9e3779b9, 0x243f6a88, 0xb7e15162, 0x6a09e667),)
ws_init(=:Noise, =:Type) = (rng = Ẋoshiro(0, 0, 0, 0),)
function s_update(c=:Noise, b)
    r = b.ws.rng
    r.s0, r.s1, r.s2, r.s3 = b.s.rng        # load the words at entry
    z = randn(r)
    (rng = (r.s0, r.s1, r.s2, r.s3),)       # snapshot them back
end
Rematerializing the generator from its values each tick reads naturally and allocates. A sampler 
with an out­of­line tail lets the object escape (D­231).
Construction and storage of large SArrays are cheap and compile fine. The StaticArrays "codegen 
catastrophe" lives in its operations, the unrolled matmuls, which are never called on snapshots.
The discipline is that snapshot values are for storage, logging and element access only, never arith­
metic. It is optionally enforceable by an op ­forbidding ValueSnapshot{N,T} wrapper, an NTuple with 
only getindex and iteration, structurally what SArray is minus the methods. The practical ceiling is 
a few KB comfortable and tens of KB defensible. Beyond that, value semantics stop making sense.
Double­buffered mutable state (deferred)
Double­buffered mutable state is a possible future extension only, deferred (D­013).
5
=====PAGE=====
7.4 The fused­evaluation lineage (prior art and how we got here)
The §5.2 interfaces are the end point of a four ­step simplification arc. The arc is recorded here 
because each step replaced a mechanism with something smaller.
1. N output groups → exactly two (D­006), at the price of an occasional component split (§5.4).
2. Derivative binding → own­output access (D­015). Passing the fresh signal table to x_deriv/
s_update subsumes the declaration feature, and the "binding" becomes a one­line function body.
3. Separate state arguments → the state decoder  ( D­016, D­035). Step 4 later reversed the 
second half of this step.
4. Decoder­exclusive state access → stores ­and­views arguments. Step 3's second half was 
reversed (D­035). Once §8.3 made publication a deliberate interface act, the identity decode stood 
revealed as transport. It copied the buffer into cells so that a buffer view could be replaced by a 
cell view. The fixed point is the argument rule ( §5.2), zero­copy views of the stores a function 
genuinely reads. What survives of step 3 is the uniform shapes, the fused economics, and the 
stage­1 decoder itself (today's y_state). That decoder is no longer the sole state gate. It is the no­
feedthrough stage.
For orientation, here is the prior art. Every causal framework meets the shared ­computation 
problem and resolves it per its architecture. Simulink diagrams make integrators explicit blocks. 
Derivatives are ordinary wires into 1/s, and the computer/integrator split is their native idiom. S­
functions and FMUs  use sanctioned mutable caches, DWork vectors and FMI's lazy ­evaluation 
caching, between their mdlDerivatives/mdlOutputs­style callback pairs. Modelica/MTK write der(x) 
= expr natively with symbolic CSE. The fused sweep plus signal­consuming x_deriv/s_update is the 
cache­free formulation that fits this design's purity rules. It is also what FlightCore's fused f_ode! 
did economically, minus the checked ordering.
The computer/integrator split  remains fully expressible without any framework support. A 
stateless component computes derivatives as outputs, wired into a trivial state­holding component. 
It is the idiom of choice when the factoring earns reuse, for example one Newton–Euler solver 
shared across vehicle variants, or swappable kinematic descriptors against a common integrator 
shape. Against a split­form spelling of the same model (four components, thirteen connections), the 
merged form has half the components and wiring. Everything derivable from pose alone migrates 
to stage 1, shortening the stage­2 chain.
7.5 Allocation policy: a scoped invariant
The allocation policy is not dogma. Three reasons support it, and only one is about speed. First, GC­
pause jitter control for real­time. Second, throughput for unattended runs (runs with empty staging 
and no snapshot readers). Third, the canary . An unexpected allocation is Julia's most reliable 
symptom of type instability. A zero baseline therefore makes @allocated == 0 a CI­testable invariant, 
one that catches inference regressions at the offending commit.
• Continuous hot path. This is per­stage evaluation, plus everything else that runs uncondition­
ally per frame or boundary. Those unconditional items are guards, evaluated every boundary 
whether they fire or not, and x_projection at both of its §5.3 positions in the execution order. The 
budget is exactly zero, CI­enforced at the §9.7 phase­body seam (phase_bodies).
• Periodic ticks and event handlers. These execute episodically, a tick when due and a handler 
only on firing. Allocation here is zero by idiom. The idiom is the workspace (component­declared 
6
=====PAGE=====
mutable scratch arriving as the ws bundle field) and snapshot pattern, plus immutable ­value 
returns. The rare exception has a documented tolerance, scoped per body by the seam's granu ­
larity so it never loosens the continuous assertions.
• Logging is amortized­zero. The log retains the published snapshot objects themselves, by refer ­
ence, one slot per retained boundary and no copy (§11.2). sizehint! to the retention bound makes 
regrowth a non­event. The allocation claim is about the snapshot's fields, not about everything 
reachable from them. A model carrying §4.4 field handles (immutable query objects consumers 
evaluate at their own arguments, such as heightmap terrain or wind grids) has a snapshot type 
with reference fields. Those fields ride as references to build­time­frozen data, with no copy and 
no per­boundary garbage, which is what the allocation claim asserts. What the claim does not 
assert is that the snapshot is isbits. The per­boundary allocation cost is zero either way, and the 
summarize­or­skip rule (§4.4) governs what such a field contributes on export.
• Event firings are not recorded. The log holds boundary snapshots and the trace holds staged 
inputs (§11.2, §11.5). Neither carries a per­event record. Which events fired at which boundary is 
recovered by replay plus the published modes. The honest remedy (§11.2) is to declare the mode 
field public and return it from y_state (D­252); a mode field so exposed is in every snapshot. An 
event­firing stream is a guarded addition (a capability the design admits but does not build).
• Tools where garbage is unavoidable. Arena allocation (Bumper.jl­style) serves scoped tempo­
raries. A scheduled GC.gc(false) at frame boundaries moves collection out of the critical path. 
Julia has no per­object freeing, so these are the honest levers.
7
=====PAGE=====
Chapter 7: rewritten
7. State and data representation
This chapter fixes where data lives and how each home holds its values. Continuous state is an 
immutable value over a flat buffer the framework owns, and the continuous path is generic over its 
scalar type. Discrete state and modes live in stores, and scratch lives in a workspace. §7.1 covers 
continuous state, §7.2 numeric genericity, §7.3 discrete state, modes and the workspace, §7.4 the 
fused­evaluation lineage that led to the interfaces of §5.2, and §7.5 the allocation policy.
7.1 Continuous state: structured immutable, flat backing
This section fixes how a continuous component (the hybrid primitive, with continuous state, flow 
and events) declares its state, and how the framework lays that state out, reads it and writes it back. It 
covers, in order, the closed leaf vocabulary, the three things the framework does with a declaration, 
the buffer and its views, why the vocabulary is closed, the shape of Ẋ, and what the design buys 
against FlightCore's mutable­views pattern.
Each continuous component declares its state by value ( x_init, §8.2, D­033). The declaration is a 
NamedTuple (D­247). Its leaves are drawn from a deliberately closed vocabulary , plain real 
scalars and SArrays (static vectors and matrices) of a common eltype T, and nothing else (D­094). Ints, 
enums and Bools belong in modes. Domain wrapper types are not state leaves either. Two such types 
are RQuat, a rotation quaternion type with a normalization keyword, and Ranged, a clamped scalar. 
An attitude state is an SVector{4,T}, cast where rotation semantics are wanted, as described below. 
The structure step refuses a field outside the vocabulary as IllegalStateLeaf (§9.1). §8.2 shows the 
kind's messages.
The declaration is flat (D­094). Each field is one leaf, never a NamedTuple of leaves. The condition 
algebra and the readers address a field as one leaf ( §14.3, §14.4), and structure comes from the 
component tree, not from the value.
The framework does three things with the declaration.
• It computes a flat layout at build time. The layout has compile ­time offsets into one contiguous 
Vector{T} that the framework owns, the buffer.
• It reconstructs the typed immutable state value for a component at each evaluation. The value's 
type, Ẋ, is derived from x_init. The framework passes that value to every function receiving 
state views (zero­copy reconstructions of a store), under the argument rule of §5.2 (D­035). The 
reconstruction is field loads at known offsets, register­level, at zero cost.
• It receives immutable results back. Derivative functions return an Ẋ­typed value, which is scatter­
stored into the flat x buffer. A handler's x key and the projection (the optional hook x_projection) 
carry a new Ẋ, which is written back. Projection's write­back happens at the two positions in the 
execution order of §5.3 (D­111).
The buffer is authoritative, and typed values are ephemeral reconstructions  ( D­010). 
Nobody outside the framework ever holds a mutable reference to state. "Ephemeral" is literal. 
An isbits view materializes in the caller's frame for exactly the duration of the call, and has no 
8
=====PAGE=====
existence between calls. Where it materializes, in registers or on the spilled stack, is the compiler's 
business. Re­materializing is the same loads, and it is value­identical because the value is immutable 
and the buffer is unchanged within a sweep (one pass through the execution order). This buffer ­
unchanged­within­a­sweep rule is exactly the legality condition of the code generator's CSE, the 
common­subexpression elimination that hoists repeated reads of views rebuilt per call (§9.7, D­288).
The complementary rule is one home per datum  (each datum has exactly one home), stated in 
§5.2 (D­035). In particular there are no state cells in the signal table beyond the declared ports a 
component returns from y_state (§5.3, D­252), which are interface, not transport.
The vocabulary is closed because views must materialize without running anyone's invariants. 
Scalars and SArrays have invariant­free constructors. SVector's stores its tuple, NamedTuple construc­
tion runs no user code, and nothing normalizes or clamps. Building a view through ordinary public 
construction is therefore bit­faithful automatically. reconstruct(flatten(x)) == x holds identically, 
with no constructor bypass, no reinterpret, and no reliance on a custom struct's memory layout 
mirroring the buffer's. Invariant­carrying leaves are excluded from the vocabulary (D­094).
Domain semantics are instead an explicit, invariant­free cast at the point of use. It is the conversion 
that f_ode!, FlightCore's in­place derivative function, performed on its raw views. Invariants live 
where the design already put them, in x_projection at boundaries (published consistency points) and 
in writers. Handlers build their returned values through ordinary constructors, and the condition 
apply converts authored values through ordinary convert methods (§14.3). Constructors run on the 
write paths, never on views.
With the leaf vocabulary closed, the shape of Ẋ takes one line to state. Ẋ has exactly Ẋ's shape at the 
activation scalar (the scalar type T at which the build types the model). A scalar leaf's derivative is a 
T, and an SArray leaf's is the same SArray at T. This is what the closed vocabulary buys. An invariant­
carrying leaf like a unit quaternion has a derivative off its own type, and Ẋ would need a separate 
derivation. Here the attitude leaf is an SVector{4,T}, and so is its rate. The conformance predicate is 
structural. Each field of x_deriv's return scatters into its field's block at T (§9.5 states the check). That 
makes derivative completeness a property of the layout rather than of author discipline. There is 
deliberately no derivative_type hook (D­190).
FlightCore's pattern was a flat Vector read through ComponentArrays views, which are mutable views 
into the flat vector. Against that pattern and the Flight.jl code around it, this design buys five things.
• There are no aliased mutable views, where who writes what is a matter of convention.
• Derivative completeness is structural. The returned Ẋ has every field by construction, so a 
forgotten x entry is impossible rather than silently stale.
• State fields arrive as the declared scalars and SArrays, immutable. The domain wrapper, where 
wanted, is one explicit invariant ­free cast ( RQuat(x.q, normalization = false)). That is the 
conversion the mutable­views pattern performed implicitly, now visible and chosen.
• The flat vector still exists. Integrator compatibility (OrdinaryDiffEq or custom), trim solvers, HDF5 
logging and linearization all get their arrays.
• Flight.jl's hand­written per­aircraft state­space mapping layer (get_x_ss/assign_x_ss!/get_u_ss/…) 
is deleted, replaced by the framework's canonical layout (D­072).
9
=====PAGE=====
7.2 Numeric genericity (eltype)
The entire continuous evaluation path is generic over T :: Real, and so are the state buffer (the 
framework­owned contiguous vector backing all continuous state) and the pack/unpack machinery 
(D­011). This one design property serves four consumers.
1. Exact Jacobians for linearization, with ForwardDiff duals through the whole model, replacing 
finite differences.
2. Derivatives for trim solvers.
3. The feedthrough tracer (the set­propagation instrument classifying a rejected cycle, §5.6).
4. A trivially checkable CI invariant (D­280). One evaluation sweep (one pass through the execution 
order) with T = Dual fails loudly on any Float64 ­pinning. It fails with a MethodError or an 
InexactError at the offending line.
The rest of the section states the three classes that scope this genericity, how the declaration layer 
spells them per leaf, how lookup tables fit them, and three rules for authors.
Scoping, meaning what actually needs genericity, has three classes (D­011).
• Walked, the payload and value types constructed during evaluation. One example is 
FrameTransform, a FlightPhysics payload type. The walked types' parametrization is mechanical. 
Constructors infer T, so call sites don't change, and @kwdef defaults pin the no ­argument case to 
Float64. @kwdef is Julia's keyword­constructor macro.
• Pinned, the parameters and definitions. They stay Float64, since promotion handles mixing.
• Exempt, the discrete side (compensators, avionics). Linearization and trim differentiate continuous 
dynamics only.
For consumer 1, the discrete side's exemption is not a limitation but the exact answer 
(D­072). A frozen discrete cell (a typed entry of the signal table) is a constant with zero 
partials. That is what "linearize the continuous dynamics with the discrete state held" means. 
frozen_discrete_walkthrough.md works the chain through in detail.
The declaration layer keeps this scoping legible without putting it in the author's way. Every decla­
ration but the allocator (§7.3) is written at nominal Float64. One walk retypes it per activation (the 
build's typed products at a given scalar type), as §8.2 states. On the continuous tier (the continuous 
or discrete side) a Float64 leaf follows the activation scalar, in a contract and in the x_init­derived 
state type alike (D­263, D­295). A contract leaf wrapped in the leaf marker Pinned{P} is deliberately 
pinned ( D­263). Participation is therefore authored per leaf, by the absence or presence of the 
marker. The discrete side stays plain and pins wholesale (D­263, D­295). Nothing anywhere comes 
from inference through user code (D­032, D­079). Safety of the substitution rests on the embedding 
guarantee stated in §9.5.
For lookups, table data is a pinned parameter and the query coordinate is walked traffic ( D­011). 
Interpolations.jl, the interpolation package Flight.jl's lookup tables use, evaluates generically over 
the coordinate. A call itp(x=:Dual) works through the BSpline/scale/extrapolate compositions in 
Flight.jl's tables. Two caveats apply. Linear() interpolants have kinked derivatives at knots. That is 
no regression against finite differences, but upgrade to Cubic where Jacobian quality near a lookup 
matters. A manual chain rule via Interpolations.gradient is the escape hatch for anything exotic, 
and the pattern for wrapping non­Julia black boxes (D­266).
Three rules are author­facing (D­011, D­235).
10
=====PAGE=====
1. No =:Float64 argument annotations in math. Use =:Real or nothing.
2. No Float64­pinned intermediates. Write zero(SVector{3,T}).
3. No =:SomeType{Float64} return ­type annotations on the continuous path, because they force 
converts and hence InexactError.
7.3 Discrete state, modes, and workspace
Two homes sit outside the continuous buffer (the framework­owned contiguous vector backing all 
continuous state), and the rules they obey are opposites. Discrete state and modes are state in the 
full sense. They are values whose fields are isbits or Symbols. The framework owns them, and a 
checkpoint copies them wholesale. A workspace is mutable scratch, deliberately not state at all, 
governed by contract rather than by checks. The section states the rules of the s and m stores (the 
framework­owned homes of those letters) first, then the workspace's rules, then the idioms that join 
the two homes.
Stores: discrete state and modes
Discrete state, a discrete leaf's s, and the modes m live in typed stores, apart from the buffer 
that holds x (§7.1, D­013, D­302). The framework overwrites an s or m store when an update or a 
handler returns a new value.
An s or m store keeps the same immutable ­value discipline as the signal table's cells, in a separate 
home. The vocabulary of §4.1 never counts a store as a cell (D­302). The s and m stores never touch 
the buffer, and no arithmetic is ever done on them.
Every field of an s or m store value is isbits or a Symbol (D­231). An isbits value is immutable and 
holds no references, transitively. Enums, integers, Bools, SArrays and nested isbits structs all qualify. 
A String, an array, or a struct holding either does not qualify.
A Symbol is admitted as the idiomatic label. It is interned, immutable and never freed, so it copies 
as a pointer to permanent data and serializes as its name. The table admits it on the same grounds, 
as an opaque leaf (§4.3). A struct nesting a Symbol does not qualify. The structure step checks every 
s_init and m_init field and reports a violation as IllegalStoreField (§9.1, Appendix C, D­231).
The rule rests on what state is. State is what changes between ticks (the instants a discrete 
component runs). Bulk data and text do not, and their home is the component instance. The frozen­
reference latitude stays with signals (§4.1, D­231). It exists for field handles (§4.4), and no store 
needs it. Isbits is what makes the rest of this section literal. Copying an s or m store copies bits. 
So checkpoint and replay (the ordinary loop re­driven from the trace) of the entire discrete side is 
"copy the store values", and a stored value has one fixed layout per component.
Double­buffered mutable state is a possible future extension only, deferred (D­013).
Workspace
A workspace serves heavy algorithms, such as an n≈20 Kalman filter. A workspace is component ­
declared mutable scratch, instantiated by the framework ( D­013). It arrives as the ws field of the 
bundle (the NamedTuple of zero ­copy views a component function receives) in every bundle ­
receiving function of the declaring component ( §5.2). x_projection is positional and receives none 
(D­074).
11
=====PAGE=====
A workspace is excluded from state semantics. It is not snapshotted, not replayed and never a 
condition target (§14.1). It must carry no information between calls (D­183).
The framework never inspects or mutates a workspace (D­183). The workspace is an opaque, 
opt­in escape hatch from value semantics, used at the author's own risk. Its rules are contract, not 
checks. At call entry, contents are unspecified beyond the structure the allocator itself established. A 
plan or factorization configured at allocation is valid from then on. Scratch is garbage until written 
this call, and nothing a previous call left behind may be relied upon. No poisoning of scratch is 
attempted.
A workspace is declared by allocation, never by initial value (D­077). The well­known method 
is the allocator.
ws_init(c=:KF, =:Type{T}) where {T} =
    (P = Matrix{T}(undef, c.n, c.n), xC = Vector{T}(undef, c.n))
ws_init(::C, ::Type{T}) takes the activation scalar on both tiers, and it is the one declaration 
that does (D­263). An activation is the build's typed products at a given scalar type, and a tier is the 
continuous or the discrete side. A discrete allocator receives Float64 at every activation, because the 
discrete tier never runs at another scalar (§9.4). x_init, s_init, m_init and the contract declarations 
take the component alone on every tier.
State and cells re ­scalar through the walk ( §7.2), so those declarations never need T. Scratch is 
allocated, not retyped. A factorization, a plan or a buffer sized by the scalar has no rebuild the 
framework could perform. So the eltypes can come from nowhere but the allocator's own argument 
(D­077, D­263).
Nothing in the workspace contract is tier­specific, and a continuous workspace simply joins the T­
generic surface. Under a Dual activation the allocator is called at Dual, and the in­place math runs 
through Julia's generic fallbacks. No BLAS is involved. Activations probe and linearize. They don't 
run marathons.
The allocator is called once per activation and once per scratch­store set (§14.8, D­077). Sizes come 
from the instance, and eltypes from the activation. Nothing downstream derives from a workspace's 
type, and mistyped scratch detonates loudly at the Dual probe (the build's single evaluation of a user 
function).
The undef spelling is the recommended idiom and the sole visible marker that contents are mean ­
ingless. It puts that fact in the by ­allocation declaration itself. The init in ws_init means establish, 
as the device contract's init! does (§11.6). It carries no claim that the allocated contents are a value 
(D­220).
The continuous side runs many calls per boundary (a published consistency point), for RK stages, 
localization trial evaluations and event re ­sweeps. That multiplicity makes the no ­information­
between­calls contract more essential there, not less.
Idioms
The blessed (explicitly sanctioned) workspace ­plus­snapshot idiom for zero ­allocation ticks with 
immutable s does the in ­place math on the workspace, with mul!, cholesky! or BLAS ( D­013). At 
12
=====PAGE=====
the end, it snapshots into an isbits container and returns it, as in s = KFState(SVector{20}(ws.xC), 
SMatrix{20,20}(ws.P)).
In the blessed idiom for a PRNG in a discrete leaf, a generator object such as Ẋoshiro lives in the 
workspace, and the values that determine its next draw are state in s (D­231). The generator 
is mutable, so it is scratch and lives in the workspace, allocated once. The values are immutable, so 
they are state and live in s. Keeping them in s is what makes replay deterministic ( §2.2). The tick 
loads them into the generator at entry and snapshots them back at exit, in the same shape as the 
workspace­plus­snapshot idiom above.
s_init(=:Noise)         = (rng = UInt64.((0x9e3779b9, 0x243f6a88, 0xb7e15162, 
0x6a09e667)),)
ws_init(=:Noise, =:Type) = (rng = Ẋoshiro(0, 0, 0, 0),)
function s_update(c=:Noise, b)
    r = b.ws.rng
    r.s0, r.s1, r.s2, r.s3 = b.s.rng        # load the words at entry
    z = randn(r)
    (rng = (r.s0, r.s1, r.s2, r.s3),)       # snapshot them back
end
Rematerializing the generator from its values each tick reads naturally and allocates. A sampler 
with an out­of­line tail lets the object escape (D­231).
Construction and storage of large SArrays are cheap and compile fine. The StaticArrays "codegen 
catastrophe" lives in its operations, the unrolled matmuls, which are never called on snapshots.
The discipline is that snapshot values are for storage, logging and element access only, never arith­
metic. It is optionally enforceable by an op ­forbidding ValueSnapshot{N,T} wrapper. That wrapper 
is an NTuple with only getindex and iteration, structurally what SArray is minus the methods. The 
practical ceiling is a few KB comfortable and tens of KB defensible. Beyond that, value semantics 
stop making sense.
7.4 The fused­evaluation lineage (prior art and how we got here)
Overlap between derivatives and outputs is the norm in physical and control models (§5.3). The §5.2 
interfaces are the end point of a four­step simplification arc. The arc is recorded here because each 
step replaced a mechanism with something smaller. The section gives the four steps, then the prior 
art, then an idiom the design admits without framework support.
1. N output groups gave way to exactly two (D­006), at the price of an occasional component split 
(§5.4).
2. Derivative binding gave way to own ­output access ( D­015). Passing the fresh signal table to 
x_deriv/s_update subsumes the declaration feature, and the "binding" becomes a one­line function 
body.
3. Separate state arguments gave way to the state decoder (D­016, D­035). Step 4 later reversed the 
second half of this step.
4. Decoder­exclusive state access gave way to stores ­and­views arguments. Step 3's second half 
was reversed (D­035). Once contract visibility (§8.3, D­034) made a port's publicity a declaration, 
the identity decode stood revealed as transport. It copied the buffer (the framework ­owned 
contiguous vector backing all continuous state) into cells so that a buffer view could be replaced 
13
=====PAGE=====
by a cell view. The fixed point is the argument rule (§5.2). A function receives zero­copy views of 
the stores it genuinely reads. What survives of step 3 is the uniform shapes, the fused economics, 
and the stage­1 decoder itself (now y_state). That decoder is no longer the sole state gate. It is 
the no­feedthrough stage.
Every causal framework meets the overlap between derivatives and outputs and resolves it per 
its architecture. The prior art is given here for orientation. Simulink diagrams make integrators 
explicit blocks. Derivatives are ordinary wires into 1/s, and the computer/integrator split is their 
native idiom. S­functions and FMUs use sanctioned mutable caches between their mdlDerivatives/
mdlOutputs­style callback pairs. The caches are DWork vectors and FMI's lazy ­evaluation caching. 
Modelica/MTK (ModelingToolkit) write der(x) = expr natively, with symbolic common ­subex­
pression elimination. The fused sweep plus signal ­consuming x_deriv/s_update is the cache ­free 
formulation that fits this design's purity rules ( D­015). It is also what f_ode!, FlightCore's fused in­
place derivative function, did economically, minus the checked ordering.
The computer/integrator split remains fully expressible without any framework support ( D­015). 
A stateless component computes derivatives as outputs and is wired into a trivial state ­holding 
component. It is the idiom of choice when the factoring earns reuse. Two examples are one Newton–
Euler solver shared across vehicle variants, and swappable kinematic descriptors against a common 
integrator shape. Against a split­form spelling of a rigid­body kinematics and dynamics core (four 
components, thirteen connections), the merged form has half the components and wiring ( D­015). 
Everything derivable from pose alone migrates to stage 1, shortening the stage­2 chain.
7.5 Allocation policy: a scoped invariant
The allocation policy is not dogma ( D­014). Three reasons support it, and only one is about speed. 
The first is GC­pause jitter control for real­time. The second is throughput for unattended runs (runs 
with empty staging and no snapshot readers). The third is the canary. An unexpected allocation is 
Julia's most reliable symptom of type instability. A zero baseline therefore makes @allocated == 0 
a CI­testable invariant. That invariant catches inference regressions at the offending commit. The 
section states the invariant's scope, the policy's three budgets, what the log does not record, and the 
tools for garbage that cannot be avoided.
The zero­allocation invariant is scoped to the stepping loop, and the stopped ­sim services were 
always allocation­tolerant (D­135, §14.8). Publication is not a phase body (one of the compiled bodies 
the loop runs) (D­288, §9.7). Publication's one snapshot (the immutable per­boundary publication) 
allocation per boundary sits with logging on the framework side, outside what the invariant claims 
is zero (§11.2).
The policy sets three budgets.
• The continuous hot path is per ­stage evaluation, plus everything else that runs unconditionally 
per frame or boundary. Those unconditional items are guards, evaluated every boundary whether 
they fire or not, and x_projection at both of its §5.3 positions in the execution order. The budget 
is exactly zero, CI­enforced at the measurement seam that phase_bodies exposes (§9.7, D­014, 
D­116).
• Periodic ticks (the instants a discrete component runs) and event handlers execute episodically. A 
tick runs when due, and a handler only on firing. Their allocation is zero by the workspace­plus­
snapshot idiom (§7.3) and immutable­value returns. A workspace is component­declared mutable 
14
=====PAGE=====
scratch arriving as the ws bundle field. The rare exception has a documented tolerance (D­116). The 
seam's granularity scopes the tolerance per body, so the tolerance never loosens the continuous 
assertions.
• Logging is amortized­zero. The log retains the published snapshot objects themselves, by refer ­
ence (§11.2, D­137). It keeps one slot per retained boundary and makes no copy. sizehint! to the 
retention bound makes regrowth a non­event.
The allocation claim is about the snapshot's fields, not about everything reachable from them. 
A model carrying §4.4 field handles (immutable query objects consumers evaluate at their own 
arguments, such as heightmap terrain or wind grids) has a snapshot type with reference fields. 
Those fields ride as references to build ­time­frozen data, with no copy and no per ­boundary 
garbage. That is what the allocation claim asserts. The claim does not assert that the snapshot is 
isbits. The reference fields add no per ­boundary allocation either way. The summarize ­or­skip 
rule (§4.4) governs what such a field contributes on export.
Event firings are not recorded. The log holds boundary snapshots and the trace holds staged inputs 
(§11.2, §11.5). Neither carries a per­event record. Replay (the ordinary loop re­driven from the trace) 
plus the published modes recovers which events fired at which boundary. The honest remedy is to 
declare the mode field public and return it from y_state (§11.2, D­252). A mode field so exposed is 
in every snapshot. An event­firing stream is a guarded addition (a capability the design admits but 
does not build).
Two tools serve where garbage is unavoidable. Arena allocation, in the style of the Julia package 
Bumper.jl, serves scoped temporaries. A scheduled GC.gc(false) at frame boundaries moves collec­
tion out of the critical path. Julia has no per­object freeing, so these are the honest levers.
15
=====PAGE=====
Moved out of the chapter: 
companion_addition.md
The pass also parametrizes FlightPhysics' payload and value types, the walked class of §7.2, 
about 25 structs. These are the quaternion/attitude family, Wrench, FrameTransform, MassProperties, 
KinData, AirData, geodesy value types, TerrainData and continuous output structs. What actu ­
ally needs genericity covers roughly half of Flight.jl's type inventory. Quaternion becomes 
Quaternion{N,T} =: AbstractVector{T}. By invariance, Float64 instances still match every existing 
AbstractVector{Float64} method, so existing behavior is untouched. Flight.jl's parameters and defi ­
nitions, the pinned class of §7.2, stay Float64 and need no migration. Flight.jl's math already mostly 
follows the first author rule of §7.2, writing =:Real or nothing in place of a =:Float64 argument 
annotation. The * method in Flight.jl's attitude.jl is the live example pattern for the third rule, 
no =:SomeType{Float64} return­type annotations on the continuous path.
16